Now madam. Summon up yourdearest spirits.
Consider who the king yourfather sends,
To whom he sends, andwhat's his embassy:
Yourself, held precious inthe world's esteem,
To parley with the soleinheritor
Of all perfections that aman may owe,
Matchless Navarre; theplea of no less weight
Than Aquitaine, a dowryfor a queen.
Be now as prodigal of alldear grace
As Nature was in makinggraces dear
When she did starve thegeneral world beside
And prodigally gave themall to you.
Good Lord Boyet, mybeauty, though but mean,
Needs not the paintedflourish of your praise:
Beauty is bought byjudgement of the eye,
Not utter'd by base saleof chapmen's tongues:
I am less proud to hearyou tell my worth
Than you much willing tobe counted wise
In spending your wit inthe praise of mine.
But now to task thetasker: good Boyet,
You are not ignorant,all-telling fame
Doth noise abroad, Navarrehath made a vow,
Till painful study shalloutwear three years,
No woman may approach hissilent court:
Therefore to's seemeth ita needful course,
Before we enter hisforbidden gates,
To know his pleasure; andin that behalf,
Bold of your worthiness,we single you
As our best-moving fairsolicitor.
Tell him, the daughter ofthe King of France,
On serious business,craving quick dispatch,
Importunes personalconference with his grace:
Haste, signify so much;while we attend,
Like humble-visagedsuitors, his high will.
Proud of employment,willingly I go.
All pride is willingpride, and yours is so.
Who are the votaries, myloving lords,
That are vow-fellows withthis virtuous duke?
Lord Longaville is one.
Know you the man?
I know him, madam: at amarriage-feast,
Between Lord Perigort andthe beauteous heir
Of Jaques Falconbridge,solemnized
In Normandy, saw I thisLongaville:
Well, a man of sovereign partshe is esteem'd;
Well fitted in arts,glorious in arms:
Nothing becomes him illthat he would well.
The only soil of his fairvirtue's gloss,
If virtue's gloss willstain with any soil,
Is a sharp wit matchedwith too blunt a will;
Whose edge hath power tocut, whose will still wills
It should none spare thatcome within his power.
Some merry mocking lord,belike; is't so?
They say so most that mosthis humours know.
Such short-lived wits dowither as they grow.
Who are the rest?
The young Dumain, awell-accomplished youth,
Of all that virtue lovefor virtue loved:
Most power to do mostharm, least knowing ill;
For he hath wit to make anill shape good,
And shape to win gracethough he had no wit.
Another of these studentsat that time
Was there with him, if Ihave heard a truth.
Biron they call him; but amerrier man,
Within the limit ofbecoming mirth,
I never spent an hour'stalk withal:
His eye begets occasionfor his wit;
For every object that theone doth catch
The other turns to amirth-moving jest,
Which his fair tongue,conceit's expositor,
Delivers in such apt andgracious words
That aged ears play truantat his tales
And younger hearings arequite ravished;
So sweet and voluble ishis discourse.
God bless my ladies! arethey all in love,
That every one her ownhath garnished
With such bedeckingornaments of praise?
Here comes Boyet.
Now, what admittance,lord?
Navarre had notice of yourfair approach;
And he and his competitorsin oath
Were all address'd to meetyou, gentle lady,
Before I came. Marry, thusmuch I have learnt:
He rather means to lodgeyou in the field,
Like one that comes hereto besiege his court,
Than seek a dispensationfor his oath,
To let you enter hisunpeopled house.
Here comes Navarre.
Fair princess, welcome tothe court of Navarre.
'Fair' I give you backagain; and 'welcome'
I have not yet: the roof of thiscourt is too high to be yours;
and welcome to the widefields too base to be mine.
You shall be welcome,madam, to my court.
I will be welcome, then:conduct me thither.
Hear me, dear lady; I havesworn an oath.
Our Lady help my lord!he'll be forsworn.
Not for the world, fairmadam, by my will.
Why, will shall break it;will and nothing else.
Your ladyship is ignorantwhat it is.
Were my lord so, hisignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledgemust prove ignorance.
I hear your grace hathsworn out house-keeping:
Tis deadly sin to keepthat oath, my lord,
And sin to break it.
But pardon me. I am toosudden-bold:
To teach a teacher illbeseemeth me.
Vouchsafe to read thepurpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me inmy suit.
Madam, I will, if suddenlyI may.
You will the sooner, thatI were away;
For you'll prove perjuredif you make me stay.
Did not I dance with youin Brabant once?
I know you did.
How needless was it thento ask the question!
You must not be so quick.
'Tis 'long of you that spurme with such questions.
Your wit's too hot, it speedstoo fast, 'twill tire.
Not till it leave therider in the mire.
What time o' day?
The hour that fools shouldask.
Now fair befall your mask!
Fair fall the face itcovers!
And send you many lovers!
Amen, so you be none.
Nay, then will I be gone.
Madam, your father heredoth intimate
The payment of a hundredthousand crowns;
Being but the one half ofan entire sum
Disbursed by my father inhis wars.
But say that he or we, asneither have,
Received that sum, yetthere remains unpaid
A hundred thousand more;in surety of the which,
One part of Aquitaine isbound to us,
Although not valued to themoney's worth.
If then the king yourfather will restore
But that one half which isunsatisfied,
We will give up our rightin Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendshipwith his majesty.
But that, it seems, helittle purposeth,
For here he doth demand tohave repaid
A hundred thousand crowns;and not demands,
On payment of a hundredthousand crowns,
To have his title live inAquitaine;
Which we much rather haddepart withal
And have the money by ourfather lent
Than Aquitaine so geldedas it is.
Dear Princess, were nothis requests so far
From reason's yielding,your fair self should make
A yielding 'gainst somereason in my breast
And go well satisfied toFrance again.
You do the king my fathertoo much wrong
And wrong the reputationof your name,
In so unseeming to confessreceipt
Of that which hath sofaithfully been paid.
I do protest I never heardof it;
And if you prove it, I'llrepay it back
Or yield up Aquitaine.
We arrest your word.
Boyet, you can produceacquittances
For such a sum fromspecial officers
Of Charles his father.
Satisfy me so.
So please your grace, thepacket is not come
Where that and otherspecialties are bound:
To-morrow you shall have asight of them.
It shall suffice me: atwhich interview
All liberal reason I willyield unto.
Meantime receive suchwelcome at my hand
As honour without breachof honour may
Make tender of to thy trueworthiness:
You may not come, fairprincess, in my gates;
But here without you shallbe so received
As you shall deem yourselflodged in my heart,
Although so denied fairharbour in my house.
Your own good thoughtsexcuse me, and farewell:
To-morrow shall we visityou again.
Sweet health and fairdesires consort your grace!
Thy own wish wish I theein every place!
Sir, I pray you, a word:what lady is that same?
The heir of Alencon,Katharine her name.
A gallant lady. Monsieur,fare you well.
I beseech you a word: whatis she in the white?
A woman sometimes, an yousaw her in the light.
Perchance light in thelight. I desire her name.
She is an heir ofFalconbridge.
What's her name in thecap?
Rosaline, by good hap.
Is she wedded or no?
To her will, sir, or so.
You are welcome, sir:adieu.
Farewell to me, sir, andwelcome to you.
That last is Biron, themerry madcap lord:
Not a word with him but ajest.
And every jest but a word.
It was well done of you totake him at his word.
I was as willing to grappleas he was to board.
Two hot sheeps, marry.
And wherefore not ships?
No sheep, sweet lamb, unlesswe feed on your lips.
You sheep, and I pasture:shall that finish the jest?
So you grant pasture forme.
Not so, gentle beast:
My lips are no common,though several they be.
Belonging to whom?
To my fortunes and me.
Good wits will be jangling;but, gentles, agree:
This civil war of witswere much better used
On Navarre and his book-men;for here 'tis abused.
If my observation, whichvery seldom lies,
By the heart's still rhetoricdisclosed with eyes,
Deceive me not now,Navarre is infected.
With what?
With that which we loversentitle affected.
Your reason?
Why, all his behaviors didmake their retire
To the court of his eye,peeping thorough desire:
His heart, like an agate,with your print impress'd,
Proud with his form, inhis eye pride express'd:
His tongue, all impatientto speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste inhis eyesight to be;
All senses to that sensedid make their repair,
To feel only looking onfairest of fair:
Methought all his senseswere lock'd in his eye,
As jewels in crystal forsome prince to buy;
Who, tendering their own worthfrom where they were glass'd,
Did point you to buy them,along as you pass'd:
His face's own margent didquote such amazes
That all eyes saw his eyesenchanted with gazes.
I'll give you Aquitaineand all that is his,
An you give him for mysake but one loving kiss.
Thou art an old love-mongerand speakest skilfully.
He is Cupid's grandfatherand learns news of him.
Then was Venus like her mother,for her father is but grim.
If love make me forsworn,how shall I swear to love?
Ah, never faith could hold,if not to beauty vow'd!
Though to myself forsworn,to thee I'll faithful prove:
Those thoughts to me were oaks,to thee like osiers bow'd.
Study his bias leaves andmakes his book thine eyes,
Where all those pleasures livethat art would comprehend: